# UNIX Introduction

## Operating System

defined as a software that controls the hardware resources of the computer and provides an environment under which programs can run.

software -> kernal

Interface to kernal is a layer of software called system calls.

Libraries are built on system call interface, but applications are free to use boths.

### Loggin In

when we login, the system looks up our login infor in the file `/etc/passwd`.
The file format (colon separated) - login name, encrypted pass, numeric id, numeric group, comment field, home directory and shell program

### Files

File system is a hierarchical arrangement of directories and files. Everything starts in the directory called root, whose name is the single character `/`.

A directory is a file that contains directory entries. we can think of each directory as containing a filename along with a structure of information describing the attributes of the file.

attributes such as the type of the file, size, owner, permissions, last modified.

`stat` and `fstat` returns the structure of information containing all the attributes of the file.

#### Filename

The names in the directory are called filenames. The only two characters that can't appear in the filename are `/` and a `null` character.
slash - separates the filenames that form a pathname and null character terminates the pathname.

Two filenames are automatically created whenever a new directory is created. `.` and `..`. `.` referes to current directory and `..` refers to parent directory.

#### Pathname
A sequence of one or more filenames, separated by slashes and optionally starting with a slash.

A pathname that begins a slash, forms a pathname otherwise relative pathname

#### File Descriptors

They are normally small non-negative integers that the kernal uses to identify the files accessed by a process. Whenever it opens an existing file or creates a new fil, the kernal returns a file descriptions that we use when we want to read or write the file.

`ls > file.list ` - Redirecting (copy output of ls to file.list)
`./a.out < infile > outfile` - Input and ouput

> Un buffered IO is provided by `read`,`write`, `lseek`, and `close`. These all 
> work with file descriptors.

If the output file doesn't exist, the shell creates it by default.
> Standard IO relieves us from having to choose optimal buffer sizes such as BUFFSIZE

### Programs and processes

A program is an executable file residing on disk in a directory. A program is read into memory and is executed by the kernal as a result of one of the seven `exec` functions.
An executing instance of a program is called a process. Each have unique process ID.

`getpid()` defined in the `<unistd.h>` returns process id of the process. It returns a `pid_t` data type, which fits in long.

#### Process Control

There are three primary functions for procfess control. `fork`, `exec`, `waitpid`.

#### Threads and Thread IDs

Usually, a process has only one thread of control - one set of machine instructions executing at a time.

All threads within a process share the same address space, file descriptors, stacks and process-related attributes. Each thread executes on its own stack, althrough it could access stack information of other threads.

Thread IDs are local to a process.

#### Error Handling

`<errno.h>` has a lot of error functions and macros. For every error that occurs, it will be saved to errno variable. Possible way to access or modify is `extern int errno`. But errno numbers must be separte and shouldn't be linked with various process threads. So linux supports multithreaded access to errno by defining it as 
`extern int *__errno_location(void);`
`#define errno (*__errno_location());`

Two rules
    - It's value is never cleared if a error does not occur.
    - The value errno is never set to 0
`#include <string.h>`
`char *strerror(int ernum);`

`#include <stdio.h>`
`void perror(const char* msg); //produces err message based on errno (errno.h)`