#FILE I/O

Most file I/O on a UNIX system can be performed using only five functions: __open__, __read__, __write__, __lseek__, __close__. Most of the functions in this chapter deals with **unbuffered I/O**. Unbuffered means that each read and write invokes system call in the kernal.

Unbuffered are not a part of ***ISO C*** but are part of ***POSIX.1*** and ***SINGLE UNIX Specification***.

##File Descriptors
To the kernal, all open files are referred to by file descriptors. File descriptors are non negative integers. When we open or create a file, the kernal returns a file descriptors to the process. When we want to read or write to a file, we identify the file with the file descriptor that was returned by `open` or `creat` as an argument either to `read` or `write`.

> File descriptor 0 is standard Input
> File descriptor 1 is standard Output
> File descriptor 2 is standard Error

```
#include <unistd.h>
STDIN_FILENO //Standard Input
STDOUT_FILENO //Standard Output
STDERR_FILEERR //Standard Err
```
## **open** and **openat** Functions

A file is opened or created by calling either open function or the openat function.

```
#include <fcntl.h>
int open(const char *path, int oflag, ... /* mode_t mode */);
int openat(int fd, const char *path, int oflag, ... /* mode_t mode */);
```
***Both return a file descriptor if OK, -1 on error***

> By ORing many modes we can use all those modes combined

## **creat** Function

A new file can also be created by calling the creat function.

```
#include <fcntl.h>
int creat(const char *path, mode_t mode);
```
***Returns a file descriptor if OD, -1 on error***

This function is equal to
`open (path, O_WRONLY, O_CREAT, O_TRUNC, mode);`
> O_WRONLY - Write Only
> O _CREAT - Create if the file doesn't exist
> O_TRUNC - If the file is opened successfully for either write-only or read-write, truncate its length to 0.

One deficieny with `creat` is that the file is opened only for writing. Before the new version was provided, if we were creating a temporary file that we wanted to write and then read back, we had to call `creat`, `close` and then `open`.
A better way to open function as in, 
`open (path, O_RDWR, | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC, mode);`

## close Function

A open file is closed by calling the `close` function.

```
#include <unistd.h>
int close(int fd);
```

## lseek Function

Read and write operations normally start at the current file offset and cause the offset to be incremented by the number of bytes read or written. By default, this offset is initialized to 0 when a file is opened, unless the O_APPEND option is specified.

```
#include <unistd.h>
off_t lseek(int fd, off_t offsetm int whence);
```
***Returns new file offset if OK, -1 on error***